Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, I think all of us realize that the strength
of the Western nations of Europe and of the United States and Canada offer the greatest
hope and assurance for peace if we can stand together and work together, one for all and
all for one, militarily, economically and politically. So that in 1949 the North Atlantic
Treaty organization was created and up to this time we have gotten along, although we've
had many differences between the 15 nations comprising what we call NATO. Many of us have
been interested for a long, long time in having a citizens' commission to work as with other
commissions of other NATO nations, a limited number to meet and to continue to discuss ways
and means of improving the techniques and the operations and the unity of our North Atlantic
Treaty organization. And last fall this resolution was passed by the Congress of the United
States after an effort. Then in March of this year the United States Commission was created
consisting of 20 members. Today we're very honored in having with us the co-chairman of the United
States Citizens Commission on NATO. There are men that you will know well and it's a great
privilege and pleasure to have with us and the studio, Mr. Will Clayton of Tennessee and Texas,
a former great undersecretary of state and one of the fine and great men of our nation.
Mr. Will, it's good to have you with us today. I certainly appreciate it. And then I'll
miss to Clayton's right is Mr. Christian Herder, a very able well-known governor, former governor
of Massachusetts. And the secretary of state served with great distinction and married and
honor until we Democrats took over here recently. Mr. Will, first, we intend to see you've
always been tremendously fond of you because you grew up, I believe, at Jackson, Tennessee.
Thank you, Assistant. Yes, I did. I was re-adding Jackson. Left when I was 15 years old when I
have a very warm spot in my heart for Tennessee. Yes, sir. And then after you became the head of
Anderson Clayton Company, one of the greatest cut-in company in the world, and you were here as
in government. You found a place called Look Out Mountain and you built a home there and lived
there for a number of years, didn't you? Yes. We had a summer home there and lived there for
20 summers, I think. Well, I can certify because it's a wonderful place to spend the summer.
We have a between the bank and the insurance company and I see and I have a summer house up
there ourselves. Well, Mr. Herder, tell us about the work of the United States Citizens Commission
and what is the trouble with NATO at the present time? What are we aiming at? Well, you asked for
a pretty wide field. Well, you asked I can add a little part. That's easy. Commissioners, you know,
only got organized shortly after its appointment and in recent weeks, various members of the commission,
including Will Clayton myself, have been traveling to different countries in order to simulate
the creation of similar committees in the NATO countries so that in time we could organize a
type of convention that was envisaged in the resolution. I think that that is progressing,
but it's a slow process because in the good many cases it's not entirely clear just how the
committee should be set up and we have set it rather unusual precedent so others can't necessarily
with some of their parliamentary restrictions follow and exact the same detail.
The interfather work of the commissioners concerned I agree entirely with the very first words that you said
that perhaps the most important thing today, the first priority from the fund review of the free world
is to make certain of the free nations of the world as represented in large measure by the
Atlantic community should be operating from a military political and economic fund review
in as close unit as it's possible to get. I have been difficult as you know. I think there's so
well known that I'd rather not go into the detail of the difficulty but I think that among the
free nations this is a characteristic of free peoples that they do have differences. That's what makes
this strong I guess. It doesn't need, but I think that the responsibility that Will Clayton and the
members of our commission have is to examine those difficulties and to explore as the resolution says
ways in which this group of the free world can strengthen the democratic free world in the
various aspects that have been laid out particularly in the economic and the political field.
Well Mr. Will we usually think of NATO as a military alliance and I know that you have
another idea about an important part of NATO tell us about the other parts, the political and
the economy. Well I'm particularly interested in Article 2 of the NATO agreement which
provides that the members of NATO which are now 15 countries shall cooperate together
from the point of view of strengthening the economic ties and cooperate in an economic sense as
well as a military sense and that Article 2 has not been put into operation to the extent that
I think it should be and we're hoping that we may be able to make some suggestions as a result of
deliberations of this United States Citizens Commission on NATO that will contribute to that end.
Well Kristen Hurrist said that you and he had been together to a number of nations where have
you been Mr. Will? We visited London and then bond and then Rome and then Paris,
of poor nations and Mr. Hurrist has been to Canada. And did you find what kind of reaction did you
find among the people and the nations that you went to? We found a warm reception in all of those
countries and a desire to cooperate with us in every possible way. Of course this commission,
setting up of this commission is rather a new thing in our country and it certainly is new in
that country that there should be a Citizens Commission that would report to the government but
would have no right to commit to government in any way. Well it is I think the commission we have is
probably one of a very few of its type but I've had the feeling that with a wise man,
dedicated man like yourselves and I want to say that I've never known a commission that had
Abler, may I know why you do have one fine woman on the commission too. We receive no compensation
who has a matter of good for the world and for the country are giving them their time, thought
and brains and influence in this great effort. Kristen, Mr. Platon said you had been up to Canada.
How much was your reaction there? What did the Canadians do about it? Well the Canadian,
I saw members of the government as well as the various members of the parliamentary bodies who
were principally concerned many of them, the NATO parliamentarians and they're going to work out
a method of representation to set up a commission. They're very much interested as you know in Canada
at the moment there is a good deal of discussion going on because of the
influence at least in some of Mr. McMillan's statements that the British are going to join the
common market and Canada naturally wondering as one of the commonwealth countries what is going to
become of the her special privileges as a commonwealth country in the British market so that
it's a pretty hot subject but I think that the Canadians all of those that I spoke to feel that
the exploration and question commissions of this kind might make the other might be very helpful
and very useful. Well, Kristen, how about Mr. Diffinbacker, the Prime Minister of Canada? He's
been very much interested in hasn't he? Yes, he's been very much interested but he is very much
concerned about this move for the British at the moment and he has asked for a meeting of the
Prime Minister of all the commonwealth countries to discuss it. I don't know whether that will come
about or not because I noticed that the British are sending very high ranking ministers to those
countries now, to Australia and New Zealand and Canada to discuss the relation of the commonwealth.
They're also sending another high commission of some of their Asiatic members of the commonwealth.
What did the NATO parliamentarians in Canada have a meeting and take action while you were there?
Yes, they did. They discussed the thing from beginning to end. We've been over now.
They're discussing various phases of it and then they asked the resolution favouring it.
I believe that Greece, one of our NATO nations has already set up a council or a commission similar
to ours. How would they Mr. Will? Yes, and it's called a Hellenic Citizens Commission on NATO.
I've always been impressed with the fact that if a military alliance is going to survive,
if we're going to have unity and strength, that we had to have some better means of
political consultation, not that we follow on another's political policy in every case,
but we all at least each know what the others doing. Like in the case, you were Secretary of State,
I believe, or were you Mr. Herder when the Suez of Fair came? No, I was under Secretary at that time.
You were under Secretary of State. And the French and British took move and
Hernerlet had not been discussed with the United States, although it involved the whole world.
Is that part of the things that you will be talking about when you meet with these representatives
of other countries? Well, one of the problems in NATO that has always arisen has been so-called
political consultation. That is the effort to try to get a common meeting ground and a common policy.
It improved very, very considerably, but it is never going to be completely satisfactory
in my way of thinking. Until our political ties are stronger than they are at the present time.
That will be part of the things that you will try to bring about, Mr. Tudor.
That's right. How do you view the General Western or Atlantic picture at the present time, Mr. Will?
I think that it illustrates very strongly the need for some means of bringing the
West to the NATO countries and the OECD countries closer together. If we are to successfully defend
ourselves in America against the monolithic power of the Soviet Union plus the Chinese,
they have a billion people now which is one out of every three in the world.
And if it ever should get to be two out of three, I think the world has lost its freedom.
Well, I just want to say on my own, ladies and gentlemen, that I think there are great hope for
pieces in the Atlantic community and free people standing together. I think that Mr. Clayton and
Mr. Hurder and the others on this commission are rendering a great public service and trying to
bring about ways and means so that we can stand together well. Better. We are indebted to them.
It may make the difference between peace and war and the days to come.
So Mr. Will Clayton, I want to thank you very much for being with us.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. Hurder, it's all for nice to be here coming. Be with us and we all appreciate it.
That's all for now. Thank you very much.